                                      1850

                                THE BALLOON-HOAX

                               by Edgar Allan Poe

  ASTOUNDING NEWS BY EXPRESS, VIA NORFOLK!- The Atlantic Crossed in
Three Days!- Signal Triumph of Mr. Monck Mason's Flying Machine!-
Arrival at Sullivan's Island, near Charlestown, S. C., of Mr. Mason,
Mr. Robert Holland, Mr. Henson, Mr. Harrison Ainsworth, and four
others, in the Steering Balloon, Victoria, after a Passage of
Seventy-five Hours from Land to Land! Full Particulars of the Voyage!

  The subjoined jeu d'esprit with the preceding heading in magnificent
capitals, well interspersed with notes of admiration, was originally
published, as matter of fact, in the New York Sun, a daily
newspaper, and therein fully subserved the purpose of creating
indigestible aliment for the quidnuncs during the few hours
intervening between a couple of the Charleston mails. The rush for the
"sole paper which had the news" was something beyond even the
prodigious; and, in fact, if (as some assert) the Victoria did not
absolutely accomplish the voyage recorded it will be difficult to
assign a reason why she should not have accomplished it. E. A. P.

  THE GREAT problem is at length solved! The air, as well as the earth
and the ocean, has been subdued by science, and will become a common
and convenient highway for mankind. The Atlantic has been actually
crossed in a Balloon! and this too without difficulty- without any
great apparent danger- with thorough control of the machine- and in
the inconceivably brief period of seventy-five hours from shore to
shore! By the energy of an agent at Charleston, S. C., we are
enabled to be the first to furnish the public with a detailed
account of this most extraordinary voyage, which was performed between
Saturday, the 6th instant, at 11 A.M. and 2 P.M., on Tuesday, the
9th instant, by Sir Everard Bringhurst; Mr. Osborne, a nephew of
Lord Bentinck's; Mr. Monck Mason and Mr. Robert Holland, the
well-known aeronauts; Mr. Harrison Ainsworth, author of "Jack
Sheppard," etc.; and Mr. Henson the projector of the late unsuccessful
flying machine- with two seamen from Woolwich- in all, eight
persons. The particulars furnished below may be relied on as authentic
and accurate in every respect, as, with a slight exception, they are
copied verbatim from the joint diaries of Mr. Monck Mason and Mr.
Harrison Ainsworth, to whose politeness our agent is also indebted for
much verbal information respecting the balloon itself, its
construction, and other matters of interest. The only alteration in
the MS. received, has been made for the purpose of throwing the
hurried account of our agent, Mr. Forsyth, into a connected and
intelligible form.

                        THE BALLOON

  Two very decided failures, of late,- those of Mr. Henson and Sir
George Cayley,- had much weakened the public interest in the subject
of aerial navigation. Mr. Henson's scheme (which at first was
considered very feasible even by men of science) was founded upon
the principle of an inclined plane, started from an eminence by an
extrinsic force, applied and continued by the revolution of
impinging vanes, in form and number resembling the vanes of a
windmill. But, in all the experiments made with models at the Adelaide
Gallery, it was found that the operation of these fins not only did
not propel the machine, but actually impeded its flight. The only
propelling force it ever exhibited, was the mere impetus acquired from
the descent of the inclined plane, and this impetus carried the
machine farther when the vanes were at rest, than when they were in
motion- a fact which sufficiently demonstrates their inutility, and in
the absence of the propelling, which was also the sustaining power,
the whole fabric would necessarily descend. This consideration led Sir
George Cayley to think only of adapting a propeller to some machine
having of itself an independent power of support- in a word, to a
balloon; the idea, however, being novel, or original, with Sir George,
only so far as regards the mode of its application to practice. He
exhibited a model of his invention at the Polytechnic Institution. The
propelling principle, or power, was here, also, applied to interrupted
surfaces, or vanes, put in revolution. These vanes were four in
number, but were found entirely ineffectual in moving the balloon,
or in aiding its ascending power. The whole project was thus a
complete failure.

  It was at this juncture that Mr. Monck Mason (whose voyage from
Dover to Weilburg in the balloon Nassau occasioned so much
excitement in 1837) conceived the idea of employing the principle of
the Archimedean screw for the purpose of propulsion through the air-
rightly attributing the failure of Mr. Henson's scheme, and of Sir
George Cayley's to the interruption of surface in the independent
vanes. He made the first public experiment at Willis's Rooms, but
afterward removed his model to the Adelaide Gallery.

  Like Sir George Cayley's balloon, his own was an ellipsoid. Its
length was 13 feet 6 inches- height, 6 feet 8 inches. It contained
about 320 cubic feet of gas, which, if pure hydrogen, would support 21
pounds upon its first inflation, before the gas has time to
deteriorate or escape. The weight of the whole machine and apparatus
was 17 pounds- leaving about 4 pounds to spare. Beneath the centre
of the balloon, was a frame of light wood, about 9 feet long, and
rigged on to the balloon itself with a net-work in the customary
manner. From this framework was suspended a wicker basket or car.

  The screw consists of an axis of hollow brass tube, 18 inches in
length, through which, upon a semi-spiral inclined at 15 degrees, pass
a series of steel-wire radii, 2 feet long, and thus projecting a
foot on either side. These radii are connected at the outer
extremities by 2 bands of flattened wire; the whole in this manner
forming the framework of the screw, which is completed by a covering
of oiled silk cut into gores, and tightened so as to present a
tolerably uniform surface. At each end of its axis this screw is
supported by pillars of hollow brass tube descending from the hoop. In
the lower ends of these tubes are holes in which the pivots of the
axis revolve. From the end of the axis which is next the car, proceeds
a shaft of steel, connecting the screw with the pinion of a piece of
spring machinery fixed in the car. By the operation of this spring,
the screw is made to revolve with great rapidity, communicating a
progressive motion to the whole. By means of the rudder, the machine
was readily turned in any direction. The spring was of great power,
compared with its dimensions, being capable of raising 45 pounds
upon a barrel of 4 inches diameter, after the first turn, and
gradually increasing as it was wound up. It weighed, altogether, eight
pounds six ounces. The rudder was a light frame of cane covered with
silk, shaped somewhat like a battledoor, and was about 3 feet long,
and at the widest, one foot. Its weight was about 2 ounces. It could
be turned flat, and directed upward or downward, as well as to the
right or left-, and thus enabled the aeronaut to transfer the
resistance of the air which in an inclined position it must generate
in its passage, to any side upon which he might desire to act; thus
determining the balloon in the opposite direction.

  This model (which, through want of time, we have necessarily
described in an imperfect manner) was put in action at the Adelaide
Gallery, where it accomplished a velocity of 5 miles per hour;
although, strange to say, it excited very little interest in
comparison with the previous complex machine of Mr. Henson- so
resolute is the world to despise anything which carries with it an air
of simplicity. To accomplish the great desideratum of aerial
navigation, it was very generally supposed that some exceedingly
complicated application must be made of some unusually profound
principle in dynamics.

  So well satisfied, however, was Mr. Mason of the ultimate success of
his invention, that he determined to construct immediately, if
possible, a balloon of sufficient capacity to test the question by a
voyage of some extent; the original design being to cross the
British Channel, as before, in the Nassau balloon. To carry out his
views, he solicited and obtained the patronage of Sir Everard
Bringhurst and Mr. Osborne, two gentlemen well known for scientific
acquirement, and especially for the interest they have exhibited in
the progress of aerostation. The project, at the desire of Mr.
Osborne, was kept a profound secret from the public- the only
persons entrusted with the design being those actually engaged in
the construction of the machine, which was built (under the
superintendence of Mr. Mason, Mr. Holland, Sir Everard Bringhurst, and
Mr. Osborne) at the seat of the latter gentleman near Penstruthal,
in Wales. Mr. Henson, accompanied by his friend Mr. Ainsworth, was
admitted to a private view of the balloon, on Saturday last; when
the two gentlemen made final arrangements to be included in the
adventure. We are not informed for what reason the two seamen were
also included in the party- but in the course of a day or two, we
shall put our readers in possession of the minutest particulars
respecting this extraordinary voyage.

  The balloon is composed of silk, varnished with the liquid gum
caoutchouc. It is of vast dimensions, containing more than 40,000
cubic feet of gas; but as coal gas was employed in place of the more
expensive and inconvenient hydrogen, the supporting power of the
machine, when fully inflated, and immediately after inflation, is
not more than about 2500 pounds. The coal gas is not only much less
costly, but is easily procured and managed.

  For its introduction into common use for purposes of aerostation, we
are indebted to Mr. Charles Green. Up to his discovery, the process of
inflation was not only exceedingly expensive, but uncertain. Two and
even three days have frequently been wasted in futile attempts to
procure a sufficiency of hydrogen to fill a balloon, from which it had
great tendency to escape, owing to its extreme subtlety, and its
affinity for the surrounding atmosphere. In a balloon sufficiently
perfect to retain its contents of coal gas unaltered, in quantity or
amount, for six months, an equal quantity of hydrogen could not be
maintained in equal purity for six weeks.

  The supporting power being estimated at 2500 pounds, and the
united weights of the party amounting only to about 1200, there was
left a surplus of 1300, of which again 1200 was exhausted by
ballast, arranged in bags of different sizes, with their respective
weights marked upon them- by cordage, barometers, telescopes,
barrels containing provision for a fortnight, water-casks, cloaks,
carpet-bags, and various other indispensable matters, including a
coffee-warmer, contrived for warming coffee by means of slack-lime, so
as to dispense altogether with fire, if it should be judged prudent to
do so. All these articles, with the exception of the ballast, and a
few trifles, were suspended from the hoop overhead. The car is much
smaller and lighter, in proportion, than the one appended to the
model. It is formed of a light wicker, and is wonderfully strong for
so frail looking a machine. Its rim is about 4 feet deep. The rudder
is also very much larger, in proportion, than that of the model; and
the screw is considerably smaller. The balloon is furnished besides
with a grapnel, and a guide-rope, which latter is of the most
indispensable importance. A few words, in explanation, will here be
necessary for such of our readers as are not conversant with the
details of aerostation.

  As soon as the balloon quits the earth, it is subjected to the
influence of many circumstances tending to create a difference in
its weight; augmenting or diminishing its ascending power. For
example, there may be a deposition of dew upon the silk, to the
extent, even, of several hundred pounds; ballast has then to be thrown
out, or the machine may descend. This ballast being discarded, and a
clear sunshine evaporating the dew, and at the same time expanding the
gas in the silk, the whole will again rapidly ascend. To check this
ascent, the only recourse is (or rather was, until Mr. Green's
invention of the guide-rope) the permission of the escape of gas
from the valve; but, in the loss of gas, is a proportionate general
loss of ascending power; so that, in a comparatively brief period, the
best-constructed balloon must necessarily exhaust all its resources,
and come to the earth. This was the great obstacle to voyages of
length.

  The guide-rope remedies the difficulty in the simplest manner
conceivable. It is merely a very long rope which is suffered to
trail from the car, and the effect of which is to prevent the
balloon from changing its level in any material degree. If, for
example, there should be a deposition of moisture upon, the silk,
and the machine begins to descend in consequence, there will be no
necessity for discharging ballast to remedy the increase of weight,
for it is remedied, or counteracted, in an exactly just proportion, by
the deposit on the ground of just so much of the end of the rope as is
necessary. If, on the other hand, any circumstances should cause undue
levity, and consequent ascent, this levity is immediately counteracted
by the additional weight of rope upraised from the earth. Thus, the
balloon can neither ascend nor descend, except within very narrow
limits, and its resources, either in gas or ballast, remain
comparatively unimpaired. When passing over an expanse of water, it
becomes necessary to employ small kegs of copper or wood, filled
with liquid ballast of a lighter nature than water. These float, and
serve all the purposes of a mere rope on land. Another most
important office of the guide-rope, is to point out the direction of
the balloon. The rope drags, either on land or sea, while the
balloon is free; the latter, consequently, is always in advance,
when any progress whatever is made, a comparison, therefore, by
means of the compass, of the relative positions of the two objects,
will always indicate the course. In the same way, the angle formed
by the rope with the vertical axis of the machine, indicates the
velocity. When there is no angle- in other words, when the rope
hangs perpendicularly, the whole apparatus is stationary; but the
larger the angle, that is to say, the farther the balloon precedes the
end of the rope, the greater the velocity; and the converse.

  As the original design was to cross the British Channel, and
alight as near Paris as possible, the voyagers had taken the
precaution to prepare themselves with passports directed to all
parts of the Continent, specifying the nature of the expedition, as in
the case of the Nassau voyage, and entitling the adventurers to
exemption from the usual formalities of office; unexpected events,
however, rendered these passports superfluous.

  The inflation was commenced very quietly at day-break, on Saturday
morning, the 6th instant in the courtyard of Wheal-Vor House, Mr.
Osborne's seat, about a mile from Penstruthal, in North Wales; and
at 7 minutes past 11, everything being ready for departure, the
balloon was set free, rising gently but steadily, in a direction
nearly South; no use being made, for the first half hour, of either
the screw or the rudder. We proceed now with the journal, as
transcribed by Mr. Forsyth from the joint MSS. of Mr. Monck Mason
and Mr. Ainsworth. The body of the journal, as given, is in the
handwriting of Mr. Mason, and a P. S. is appended, each day, by Mr.
Ainsworth, who has in preparation, and will shortly give the public
a more minute and, no doubt, a thrillingly interesting account of
the voyage.

                        THE JOURNAL

  Saturday, April the 6th.- Every preparation likely to embarrass us
having been made overnight, we commenced the inflation this morning at
daybreak; but owing to a thick fog which encumbered the folds of the
silk and rendered it unmanageable, we did not get through before
nearly eleven o'clock. Cut loose, then, in high spirits, and rose
gently but steadily, with a light breeze at North, which bore us in
the direction of the Bristol Channel. Found the ascending force
greater than we had expected; and as we arose higher and so got
clear of the cliffs, and more in the sun's rays, our ascent became
very rapid. I did not wish, however, to lose gas at so early a
period of the adventure, and so concluded to ascend for the present.
We soon ran out our guide-rope; but even when we had raised it clear
of the earth, we still went up very rapidly. The balloon was unusually
steady, and looked beautifully. In about 10 minutes after starting,
the barometer indicated an altitude of 15,000 feet. The weather was
remarkably fine, and the view of the subjacent country- a most
romantic one when seen from any point- was now especially sublime. The
numerous deep gorges presented the appearance of lakes, on account
of the dense vapors with which they were filled, and the pinnacles and
crags to the South East, piled in inextricable confusion, resembling
nothing so much as the giant cities of Eastern fable. We were
rapidly approaching the mountains in the South, but our elevation
was more than sufficient to enable us to pass them in safety. In a few
minutes we soared over them in fine style; and Mr. Ainsworth, with the
seamen, was surprised at their apparent want of altitude when viewed
from the car, the tendency of great elevation in a balloon being to
reduce inequalities of the surface below, to nearly a dead level. At
half-past eleven still proceeding nearly South, we obtained our
first view of the Bristol Channel; and, in fifteen minutes
afterward, the line of breakers on the coast appeared immediately
beneath us, and we were fairly out at sea. We now resolved to let
off enough gas to bring our guide-rope, with the buoys affixed, into
the water. This was immediately done, and we commenced a gradual
descent. In about 20 minutes our first buoy dipped, and at the touch
of the second soon afterward, we remained stationary as to
elevation. We were all now anxious to test the efficiency of the
rudder and screw, and we put them both into requisition forthwith, for
the purpose of altering our direction more to the eastward, and in a
line for Paris. By means of the rudder we instantly effected the
necessary change of direction, and our course was brought nearly at
right angles to that of the wind; when we set in motion the spring
of the screw, and were rejoiced to find it propel us readily as
desired. Upon this we gave nine hearty cheers, and dropped in the
sea a bottle, inclosing a slip of parchment with a brief account of
the principle of the invention. Hardly, however, had we done with
our rejoicings, when an unforeseen accident occurred which discouraged
us in no little degree. The steel rod connecting the spring with the
propeller was suddenly jerked out of place, at the car end, (by a
swaying of the car through some movement of one of the two seamen we
had taken up,) and in an instant hung dangling out of reach, from
the pivot of the axis of the screw. While we were endeavoring to
regain it, our attention being completely absorbed, we became involved
in a strong current of wind from the East, which bore us, with rapidly
increasing force, toward the Atlantic. We soon found ourselves driving
out to sea at the rate of not less, certainly, than 50 or 60 miles
an hour, so that we came up with Cape Clear, at some 40 miles to our
North, before we had secured the rod, and had time to think what we
were about. It was now that Mr. Ainsworth made an extraordinary but,
to my fancy, a by no means unreasonable or chimerical proposition,
in which he was instantly seconded by Mr. Holland-viz.: that we should
take advantage of the strong gale which bore us on, and in place of
beating back to Paris, make an attempt to reach the coast of North
America. After slight reflection, I gave a willing assent to this bold
proposition, which (strange to say) met with objection from the two
seamen only. As the stronger party, however, we overruled their fears,
and kept resolutely upon our course. We steered due West; but as the
trailing of the buoys materially impeded our progress, and we had
the balloon abundantly at command, either for ascent or descent, we
first threw out fifty pounds of ballast, and then wound up (by means
of a windlass) so much of the rope as brought it quite clear of the
sea. We perceived the effect of this manoeuvre immediately, in a
vastly increased rate of progress; and, as the gale freshened, we flew
with a velocity nearly inconceivable; the guide-rope flying out behind
the car, like a streamer from a vessel. It is needless to say that a
very short time sufficed us to lose sight of the coast. We passed over
innumerable vessels of all kinds, a few of which were endeavoring to
beat up, but the most of them lying to. We occasioned the greatest
excitement on board all- an excitement greatly relished by
ourselves, and especially by our two men, who, now under the influence
of a dram of Geneva, seemed resolved to give all scruple, or fear,
to the wind. Many of the vessels fired signal guns; and in all we were
saluted with loud cheers (which we heard with surprising distinctness)
and the waving of caps and handkerchiefs. We kept on in this manner
throughout the day with no material incident, and, as the shades of
night closed around us, we made a rough estimate of the distance
traversed. It could not have been less than 500 miles, and was
probably much more. The propeller was kept in constant operation, and,
no doubt, aided our progress materially. As the sun went down, the
gale freshened into an absolute hurricane, and the ocean beneath was
clearly visible on account of its phosphorescence. The wind was from
the East all night, and gave us the brightest omen of success. We
suffered no little from cold, and the dampness of the atmosphere was
most unpleasant; but the ample space in the car enabled us to lie
down, and by means of cloaks and a few blankets we did sufficiently
well.

  P.S. [by Mr. Ainsworth.] The last nine hours have been
unquestionably the most exciting of my life. I can conceive nothing
more sublimating than the strange peril and novelty of an adventure
such as this. May God grant that we succeed! I ask not success for
mere safety to my insignificant person, but for the sake of human
knowledge and- for the vastness of the triumph. And yet the feat is
only so evidently feasible that the sole wonder is why men have
scrupled to attempt it before. One single gale such as now befriends
us- let such a tempest whirl forward a balloon for 4 or 5 days
(these gales often last longer) and the voyager will be easily
borne, in that period, from coast to coast. In view of such a gale the
broad Atlantic becomes a mere lake. I am more struck, just now, with
the supreme silence which reigns in the sea beneath us,
notwithstanding its agitation, than with any other phenomenon
presenting itself. The waters give up no voice to the Heavens. The
immense flaming ocean writhes and is tortured uncomplainingly. The
mountainous surges suggest the idea of innumerable dumb gigantic
fiends struggling in impotent agony. In a night such as is this to me,
a man lives- lives a whole century of ordinary life- nor would I
forego this rapturous delight for that of a whole century of
ordinary existence.

  Sunday, the 7th. [Mr. Mason's MS.] This morning the gale, by 10, had
subsided to an eight- or nine- knot breeze (for a vessel at sea),
and bears us, perhaps, 30 miles per hour, or more. It has veered,
however, very considerably to the North; and now, at sundown, we are
holding our course due West, principally by the screw and rudder,
which answer their purposes to admiration. I regard the project as
thoroughly successful, and the easy navigation of the air in any
direction (not exactly in the teeth of a gale) as no longer
problematical. We could not have made head against the strong wind
of yesterday, but, by ascending, we might have got out of its
influence, if requisite. Against a pretty stiff breeze, I feel
convinced, we can make our way with the propeller. At noon, today,
ascended to an elevation of nearly 25,000 feet, (about the height of
Cotopaxi) by discharging ballast. Did this to search for a more direct
current, but found none so favorable as the one we are now in. We have
an abundance of gas to take us across this small pond, even should the
voyage last 3 weeks. I have not the slightest fear for the result. The
difficulty has been strangely exaggerated and misapprehended. I can
choose my current, and should I find all currents against me, I can
make very tolerable headway with the propeller. We have had no
incidents worth recording. The night promises fair.

  P.S. [By Mr. Ainsworth.] I have little to record, except the fact
(to me quite a surprising one) that, at an elevation equal to that
of Cotopaxi, I experienced neither very intense cold, nor headache,
nor difficulty of breathing; neither, I find, did Mr. Mason, nor Mr.
Holland, nor Sir Everard. Mr. Osborne complained of constriction of
the chest- but this soon wore off. We have flown at a great rate
during the day, and we must be more than half way across the Atlantic.
We have passed over some 20 or 30 vessels of various kinds, and all
seem to be delightfully astonished. Crossing the ocean in a balloon is
not so difficult a feat after all. Omne ignotum pro magnifico. Mem.:
at 25,000 feet elevation the sky appears nearly black, and the stars
are distinctly visible; while the sea does not seem convex (as one
might suppose) but absolutely and most unequivocally concave.*

  * "Mr. Ainsworth has not attempted to account for this phenomenon,
which however, is quite susceptible of explanation. A line dropped
from an elevation of 25,000 feet, perpendicularly to the surface of
the earth (or sea), would form the perpendicular of a right-angled
triangle, of which the base would extend from the right angle to the
horizon, and the hypothenuse from the horizon to the balloon. But
the 25,000 feet of altitude is little or nothing, in comparison with
the extent of the prospect. In other words, the base and hypothenuse
of the supposed triangle would be so long, when compared with the
perpendicular, that the two former may be regarded as nearly parallel.
In this manner the horizon of the aeronaut would appear to be on a
level with the car. But, as the point immediately beneath him seems,
and is, at a great distance below him, it seems, of course, also, at a
great distance below the horizon. Hence the impression of concavity;
and this impression must remain, until the elevation shall bear so
great a proportion to the extent of prospect, that the apparent
parallelism of the base and hypothenuse disappears- when the earth's
real convexity must appear.

  Monday, the 8th. [Mr. Mason's MS.] This morning we had again some
little trouble with the rod of the propeller, which must be entirely
remodelled, for fear of serious accident- I mean the steel rod, not
the vanes. The latter could not be improved. The wind has been blowing
steadily and strongly from the North-East all day; and so far fortune
seems bent upon favoring us. Just before day, we were all somewhat
alarmed at some odd noises and concussions in the balloon, accompanied
with the apparent rapid subsidence of the whole machine. These
phenomena were occasioned by the expansion of the gas, through
increase of heat in the atmosphere, and the consequent disruption of
the minute particles of ice with which the network had become
encrusted during the night. Threw down several bottles to the vessels
below. Saw one of them picked up by a large ship- seemingly one of the
New York line packets. Endeavored to make out her name, but could not
be sure of it. Mr. Osbornes telescope made it out something like
"Atalanta." It is now 12 at night, and we are still going nearly West,
at a rapid pace. The sea is peculiarly phosphorescent.

  P.S. [By Mr. Ainsworth.] It is now 2 A.M., and nearly calm, as
well as I can judge- but it is very difficult to determine this
point since we move with the air so completely. I have not slept since
quitting Wheal-Vor, but can stand it no longer, and must take a nap.
We cannot be far from the American coast.

  Tuesday, the 9th. [Mr. Ainsworth's MS.] One, P.M. We are in full
view of the low coast of South Carolina. The great problem is
accomplished. We have crossed the Atlantic- fairly and easily
crossed it in a balloon! God be praised! Who shall say that anything
is impossible hereafter?

  The Journal here ceases. Some particulars of the descent were
communicated, however, by Mr. Ainsworth to Mr. Forsyth. It was nearly
dead calm when the voyagers first came in view of the coast, which was
immediately recognized by both the seamen, and by Mr. Osborne. The
latter gentleman having acquaintances at Fort Moultrie, it was
immediately resolved to descend in its vicinity. The balloon was
brought over the beach (the tide being out and the sand hard, smooth,
and admirably adapted for a descent), and the grapnel let go, which
took firm hold at once. The inhabitants of the Island, and of the
Fort, thronged out, of course, to see the balloon; but it was with the
greatest difficulty that any one could be made to credit the actual
voyage- the crossing of the Atlantic. The grapnel caught at 2 P.M.
precisely; and thus the whole voyage was completed in 75 hours; or
rather less, counting from shore to shore. No serious accident
occurred. No real danger was at any time apprehended. The balloon was
exhausted and secured without trouble; and when the MS. from which
this narrative is compiled was despatched from Charleston, the party
were still at Fort Moultrie. Their further intentions were not
ascertained; but we can safely promise our readers some additional
information either on Monday or in the course of the next day, at
furthest.

  This is unquestionably the most stupendous, the most interesting,
and the most important undertaking ever accomplished or even attempted
by man. What magnificent events may ensue, it would be useless now
to think of determining.

                             THE END
.
